If the city of Bangalore masqueraded in the sonic dimension, it would probably be heard in a TAAQ album. 
Three wheels Nine Lives (3W9L) is a guaranteed bumpy ride thru the city on that black-and-yellow mean machine. 

3W9L impresses right from the album art, the inner sleeves, and the humungous lyric-on-one-side-album-cover-on-the-other poster.


‘Surrender’ opens up a funky first disc with a lot of hooks and sing-alongs. The wah-wah croaks and sniggers around Bruce’s Hendrixy casual vocals. The title track ‘Meter mele one and a half’ is in 11/8 time or 5.5/8 which comes from the title (meter -4, mele- plus 1 ½ =5 ½). Despite the complex time, the song’s still got addictive chorus lines.

The auto takes a break as Bruce and friends relax with mellower tones that seem to paint sonic pictures of Lalbagh. ‘In the middle’, ‘Birthday’ and ‘Bangalore flowers’ have the best lyric on the album. While ‘In the middle’  has a reference to John Coltrane ‘Birthday’ outrageously imagines the possibilities of time being space. ‘Bangalore flowers’ is the pick of disc one, which lyrics that Bangalore-lovers(lovers of Bangalore and lovers in Bangalore) can relate to and a brilliant much-awaited-on-disc-1 Bruce Lee Mani guitar solo.  

‘If them blues’ fuses Chennai’s local dabbankuthu genre(the beat, the whistle) with Hendrix’s ‘Jam back at the house’(Woodstock ’69). The jazzy guitar-vocal duet of ‘Sad Moon’ feat. Priya Mendens on haunting vocals, closes disc one.

‘For the cat’ retains some of disc-one’s  Saturday-afternoon-in-your-armchair-sipping-coffee feel of tracks like ‘Bangalore flowers’ and ‘Billboard bride’ but slowly moves into a tighter blues groove before returning back to the armchair. ‘Ho-hum(instrumental)’ is a brisk walk between auto-stands, while ‘Chameleon’ and ‘Dangerous Mind’ are the two dark-hard tracks of the album.

Saturday afternoon moves into night with the ponderous ‘Who do we have sex with?’ and the fizzy ‘Won’t stop’. The bluegrassy bonus track ‘Something you said’ closes out disc two in a fashion similar to disc one – mellow and haunting.  

The singles and live disc has its own gems –‘Simply Be’ a quirky eccentric track with a cracking bass solo, ‘Mighty Strange’ and ‘One small Love’ have fluttery sax and a husky flute with the latter being in 10/8 time embroidered with a very Dire Straitish guitar work. ‘Grab me’ is the best song of the disc, a 12/8 slow burning blues with lovely solos and the anti-corruption anthem ‘Kickbackistan’ completes the auto journey. 

In 3W9L, TAAQ have brewed a perfect concoction of laid-back bluesy tracks and brisk rock’n’roll. The environs are unmistakable – Bangalore with its street-side chat shops and the large malls, the IT folk and the parks and yet it never gets up-market at any point in the album. 

If you’re a guitarist you want Bruce’s amp and if you’re a vocalist you want his everyman Bangalorean casual approach to singing parts in complex time. His solos are sophisticated yet expressive. The rhythms section of TAAQ (K N Prakash on bass, Rajeev Rajagopal on drums) keeps the grooves tight and interesting thru the winding time signatures.

While many bands in the country are opting for a native and desi feel with Carnatic, Hindustani or folkish sounds to spice things up and express themselves succinctly, TAAQ use the time-tested palette of jazz-infused blues, and aptly so, for the urban Bangalore vibe is precisely what they want to conjure. 

Kendraka is an Indo-Jazz-fusion band based in Kolkata, a fascinating group of musicians who seamlessly blend and fuse vibrant aspects of Indian classical music with the absorbent niches of traditional jazz fusion. ‘Kendraka’ is also a Sanskrit word for 'Nucleus'. While the band has undergone a few changes in lineup since its inception in 2008, it primarily serves as the launch pad for the creative energies of bassist and founder, Mainak “Bumpy” Nag Chowdhury.

Souvenirs and Memories is a double-CD release covering their first two albums Tathastu and The Candy Album.

Tathastu (2010)

Tathastu, released in 2010, is their debut album which comprises material drawing inspiration from hard bop to fusion jazz à la Weather Report.

'Nuclear' kicks proceedings off in a fashion that would soon be identified with the Kendraka sound – winding riffs, patterns and abstract soundscapes -volatile yet succinct amidst chaos, with drummer Jivraj Satya Singh's big-band-ish drum interludes stemming from influences from the likes of Max Roach and Gene Krupa.

'19 wishes' is a Vijay Iyer type slow burning ballad, with intricate tabla over fluid guitar work. 'Pluto' is a spacey jam in 7/8 time, also the longest song on the album. 'Jack in the Box' and 'First Take' are run away jams, continuing the theme of overall confusion based much in the line of 'Nucleus'.

'Winter Drizzle' and 'Transition in Monsoon' cover two seasons welcome by most Indians with textures varying from breezy idioms to razor sharp guitar work. 'Waiting For the Sunshine' finishes the album much like an unmatched parenthesis, leaving loads of much tension to be resolved in the future albums.

While Tatahstu might easily be passed off as the smoothest musical representation of curvilinear geometry or quantum mechanics, fans of jazz-fusion in the style of Mahavishnu Orchestra and the like will certainly dig the record, it remains to be seen if the mainstream Indian rock fan base has an ear for this consummate potpourri of eclectic musical experiments.






Candy Album (2012)

While their debut album Tathastu (2010) was complex jazz fusion with confusion being the theme, Candy Album is quite the opposite - accessible, bourgeois, devoid of frippery and minimal on technical acrobatics whilst throwing a fresh perspective in colors onto the staid canvasses of Indian Fusion.

The album opens with 'Khaniker Dekha' which opens with a short bass alap on the beauteous Bilahari raaga, and culminates into a slow rhythmic jam with neat interplay of Bumpy's raga bass lines with Bodhisattwa Ghosh's jazz guitar comping. The guitar solo though short is all jazz and may alienate non-jazz listeners first time. Soumyajyoti Ghosh's flute solo is haunting, while the Mridangam adds depth to the overall texture.

'Thirteenth hour' is my pick of the album. A rhythmically tight piece with an addictive mellow riff in the moonlit Kaapi raaga harmonized on the bass, guitar and flute, embedded with Bodhi's sparkling guitar tone, grows on you on repetitive listens. 

The aptly named '27 steps to Chaos' is the darkest track on the album. There's liberal confusion of calm amidst the rhythmic chaos with contrasting serene flute interludes, fractured guitars and rap references of Tolkien(gosh, everyone uses Tolkien a lot) and Hindu Mythology. (or maybe Amish Tripathi?) 

'The Jive' is a free floating, latter day Mahavishnu Orchestra-type jam piece with a rhythmically complex yet lucid main hook. Just the one wacky squealy solo from Bodhi and the band returns to the twisty main theme before heading into the final track 'Ode to the Wishful Passage'. 'Ode...' has a deep, melancholy theme of the final passage of the human soul(as laid out on the album cover). Bumpy's bass playing is highly evocative and introspective, paints a picture of a man in agony silhouetted on the banks of the Benares.

Travelling quite deep emotionally than the tiny informative quips on the liner notes, Candy... culminates into a sedate, self-inquisitive journey. Kendraka's cohesiveness is a notable mention, mostly an approach wherein the bass leads and guitar comps in the background.

Kendraka's double-CD album is a good place to start to understand what's brimming up in the Indian Jazz-fusion scene. Souvenirs... is an absorbing multi-listen with melodic and harmonic depth, setting up an interesting future for Kendraka and their growing fan base, with a direction more towards Carnatic rock in true terms of the word.
After listening to Motherjane's Maktub, I was really looking forward to and all geared up for Baiju's solo album. Baiju Dharmajan's first solo album contains six fresh instrumental pieces in a sonic setting quite different from the darker Motherjane palettes. Costing a mere Rs. 30 for an mp3 download on Flipkart, the album is a steal, given the rich quality of content Baiju offers in his short eponymous album. The whole album's got a laid back, feel good approach yet not lacking in mean guitar riffs. 
Crossover opens up with a very Steve Vai-Steve Morse-ish jam track ‘Demented’. Baiju throws in killer ‘carnatic’ riffs right from the start on this album and there are some very accessible riffing and infectious guitar playing. The rhythms section could have been more interesting with live drums. Soloing is very fluid, bluesy yet freak-outish. 
The album takes a shift from Saturn-orbiting stuff to breezy biking on seaside highways of Kerala with the next track ‘Alchemy’. On this rhythmically complex track in 7/8 time, Baiju goes to his Ilayaraaja roots clearly. With the Tubescreamer on full, the tone's killer and at times throaty, reminding one of "Blow by Blow" and "Wired" sounds of Jeff Beck. 
‘Halo,’ the third track continues on this breezy outlook with more of the "backwaters and china nets" atmospheres. With apt circular riffing and a raga-base (closely resembles Hamsadhwani at places), ‘Halo’ is a jocular trip, which is well contrasted by the next track ‘Cyber Reptile’. 
‘Cyber Reptile’ is one to plug in and go on an ego trip through the cubicles of your office to the coffee kiosk downstairs. As in many songs on the album, the riff is very cyclical turning in circles, the recurrent theme. The rhythm section is very similar to the electronica albums of Beck and Satriani (Jeff by Beck, 2003 and Engines of Creation by Satch, 2000). The solo has those contextually apt and fantastic breaks of slide-licks. The squeals and bends contribute to the overall futuristic sound scapes amidst the effervescent carnatic riffing. 
‘Philia’ is a soulful ballad. A hit the brakes after bucket-loads of riffing and heavy patterns. It is also set in a complex time signature of 5/4 but in a more self-reflective mood, with textures very much in the style of traditional carnatic composers. ‘Philia’ is certain to be the "sunset song" for many! 
The album closes out with the wah-wah heavy, yet softer in overall texture ‘Landscapes’ which doesn't feature the flashy guitar playing, but with effects galore paints a picture of fascination that an urban yuppie would get while travelling across the greens of the paddy fields and the clear blue sky somewhere in interior South India.
Overall, there are eclectic soundscapes reminiscent of Asimovian space-fiction, coconut trees, backwaters of Cochin and IT office cubicles. Instrumental rock in India starts here for me. And surely more Satriani and Vai like sounds can be expected from the "God of Small Strings" Baiju Dharmajan.  
Bone of Contention: Carnatic rock is a term used constantly to describe Motherjane's and more specifically Baiju Dharmajan's music. For something to be called 'carnatic rock' we need raagas, gamakas and the usual rock components of riffs, power chords and blues licks. The quintessential recording that emphasizes all these aspects of 'carnatic rock' remains 'Electric Ganesha Land' by Prasanna(2006). In my opinion, Crossover may not classify as carnatic rock, but it does set a mood for things to come that may tend more towards 'carnatic rock', but at the moment we could term it 'Desi-Rock', 'Native-rock', 'roots-rock' or some other word that hazily captures music set in indigenous environments.
After wading through tonnes of musical material from the western world, ranging from 50s hard bop jazz to Instrumental rock of Joe Satriani, acid poets like Hendrix and Dylan to political ones like Frank Zappa, I hit a wall and turned around and looked back at the music that used to play in my house when I was a child. It was sung by a woman with the voice of Goddess Saraswati herself– MS Subbulakshmi. One song from the whole tape of the Carnegie Hall concert hit me, made me stand up and take notice. The song was Sri Mahaganapathi Ravatumam by Muthuswami Deekshitar. I started on a quest that still has endless destinations in time and space to cover.
Before continuing with the monologue on my favorite composer of all time, let me introduce you to my perception of music. Good music in my opinion must
1.	involve hard work in creating/composing, teaching, learning, rendering and listening .
2.	Stir one's limitless imagination
3.	create an intellectual challenge in understanding the underlying expression of the composer.
I will be basing my analysis and introspection of Deekshitar's music on these points.

Life and Background
Deekshitar was born into a Tamil Iyer family in Tiruvarur, Tamil Nadu in 1775. The place is full of lush green farmlands, beautiful river-fronts and majestic Temples of the Chola period. Deekshitar learnt the Vedas, and every other sacred document in the Hindu scriptures, was a mulitlinguist, learnt astrology and sciences in the Brahmin traditions. He traveled far and wide visiting shrines from Badrinath down to Rameshwaram. His instrument of choice was the Veena. With his brother Baluswami, Deekshitar experimented with western violin and pioneered its inclusion into Carnatic music. He left his mortal coil on Deepavali day in 1835 as he requested his students to sing the kriti - meeenakshi memudham dehi(raaga purvikalyani, adi tala).
Aspects of Deekshitar's music
Inner peace, advaita
Deekshitar kritis are set in meditative moods. The pace of a Deekshitar song is slow and easy in a setting pretty similar to a slow 12-bar blues song like Stormy Monday (T-Bone Walker). There's inner peace in the Sanskrit lyrics. Deekshitar wrote songs in praise of the Lord/Goddess and cites every other good book of Hindu philosophy. There's a lot of inclusiveness and the concept of advaita rings aloud, showing the secular aspect of his music, in contrast to popular belief that Carnatic music is Hindu devotional music.


Beyond Devotion and underneath the lyrics
Basic tendency of any listener is to get carried away by what is being said in the lyrics. This causes one to overlook the underlying musical scenery which can take breathtaking forms based on one's perception and imagination. In Deekshitar case one has to look beyond the lyrics, though to decode and understand just the lyrics is a life's work!
As Deekshitar's songs had inner peace and emotional stability of sorts, unlike say Tyagaraja whose kritis evokes the right emotion in lyric and the raga it is set in. It is vital to segregate the music from the lyrics and analyze it as a separate entity. The compositions reflect on emotions and atmospheres that certainly go beyond just devotion and has diverse effect on the listener based on his/her day. 
The time traveler
The first thing that struck me after I had started listening to his music in its purest form(without lyric) was the different time frames it evoked. While the gurjari raga kriti Gunijanadi nuta took me ages back to Maurya time Pataliputra, the suratti raga masterpiece Shri Venkata girisham was pretty apt in today's attitude laden “i am what I am” world. While the same suratti manifested in Balasubramanyam bhajeham took me to Deekshitar time Chola land with a 'boat on the cauvery' feel. While some kritis sounded too well while reading Asimov's space-age fiction(cintaye mahalinga murtim in paraju, hari hara putram in vasantha), Bala gopala in Bhairavi gives you a sneak peek into the day in life of Yashoda, with alternating tension(as Krishna's doing some mischief) and sweet relief(the naughty kid caught stealing butter smiles so sweet).
Incidentally Deekshitar's intent in making time-oriented music is revealed in three Anandabhairavi raaga compositions. Dhandayudhapanim  is set in pann(ancient tamil music) style of the raaga, Kamalaamba Samrakshatumam is set in the 1700s style of the raaga and Manasa guruguha is set in the current(modern) version of the raaga.

Rhythms, flow and feel
Most of the compositions are set in cycles of 3 or multiples like 6/9/12. It so follows that most of the music we tap our feet too be it swing jazz or a blues shuffle or a waltz or even kuttu paatu is set in 3x/8 time(swing is 4/4 triplet feel, blues shuffle is 12/8, waltz -3/4 kuttu paatu 6/8). Deekshitar was ahead of his time in composing songs that were inherently feet-tapable.
Vallabha Nayakasya(begada) has a distinctive waltz feel, jambupathe(yamuna kalyani) has watery flow, Dharmasamvardhini(madhyamavathi), ramachandrena(manji)  and shankachakra(purnachandrika) swing like big band jazz, while Ni Saati Deivamu(sriranjani) dances with all the guile in the world.
Deekshitar effortlessly composed songs that swing in tala cycles of 5/10 and 7/14 as well. Prime examples of complex taala made easy and feet-tapable – Sri matrubhootam(kannada), kailasanathena(kambhoji), anandeswarena(anandabhairavi), akshayalingavibho(shankarabharanam) and anandanatanaprakasham(kedaram). 
But there're examples were complexity in music, taala and lyric were all infused to present a great intellectual challenge to the singer and listener alike. Sri kamalaambikaya param in Bhairavi is a masterpiece in sahitya(lyric), raaga, bhava(feel), taala and laya(inherent rhythms). These songs were specifically made with geeks(like) in mind!

Serendipity despite obviousness
The greatest aspect of his compositions is the use of double-time lyric to end a stanza. Placed much like blues turnarounds the madhyamakaala(double time) sahitya are the real killer phrases of any kriti. As much of the song would have had heavily swung, floating, flying, sliding phrases with a lot of emphasis on gamakas, the madhyamakaala is brisk, flat notes that go up and down the raga in frantic pace and cover the most beautiful aspects of a particular raaga. Deekshitar also built the phrases preceding a madhyamakaala so gracefully that even a person who hasn't listened to a particular kriti would easily guess the right place of the madhyamakaala, again strikingly similar in character to a blues turnaround!
The composition gradually builds slowly on itself, each phrase technically and emotionally connected to its previous and next phrases, like tributaries that join a big river. The kriti builds up to the end by picking pace, like the river approaching a waterfall and lets gravity loose at the madhyamakaala.
Deekshitar also used simple plain notes like ma/pa to convey a lot of emotion and yet maintain the feel of the raaga which is audacious to think for any carnatic composer, given that many raagas have these notes in common. E.g –charanams of jambupathe, sri kalahastisa(huseni), nilotpala nayike(nariritigowla), sri nathadi guruguho(malavagowla), cintayamakanda(bhairavi), sri subramanyo(thodi).
Manipravala kritis and ragamalika craziness
Such was the extent of imagination, creativity, musical genius and utter craziness of the man, that he created kritis which had lines containing 3 languages – tamil, sanskrit and telugu. Sri Abhayamba(sri raga), Venkatachalapathe(karnataka kapi) are prime examples of the manipravala kritis. He also composed raagamalikas- wherein the raagas keep changing after each line of lyric. What sets up interesting possibilities in jazz-fusion today was explored in detail some 200 years back by the great man. His father Ramaswami Deekshitar also experimented with great success in the ragamalika genre of composing and passed on his wisdom to his great son.
Resurrecting the past for the future
Deekshitar also resurrected great raagas of the past and set kritis that were futuristic. Deekshitar kritis in old-school Bhairavi, Old-school todi, Ghanta, ahiri, takka, padi, gurjari, the gowlais – narayana, chaya and purva, saamantha etc. are still the final say in these raagas in terms of handling. And these raagas seem to be timeless in the kritis of Deekshitar, paving way for science-fiction carnatic music.
Attention to detail
Finally Deekshitar was famed for his attention to detail in his kritis. He meticulously explains aspects of the temple in his lyrics (ranganayakam in nayaki, shankachakra in purnachandrika, sri matrubhutam in kannada, pahi mama ratnachala in mukhari, anandanatanaprakasham in kedaram, etc)  and stories related to the temples from the puranas. Sangeetha Kalanidhi  Smt. R. Vedavalli once explained in a lecture demonstration that “if he had had buses in his time, Deekshitar would have mentioned the bus routes to the temple in his kritis”. Such was the obsessiveness he possessed in preserving the ancient traditions.
Special kriti mentions and their feels
Jambupathe – yamuna kalyani – composed on Lord Shiva at Thiruvanaikaval, Trichy.
Deekshitar plays with fluid mechanics all along the song. The lines build up in different patterns like a fountain and end by hitting a zenith and flowing back to the ground. Or maybe like waves that make crazy patterns only to hit the shore and go back. The striking aspect is that the song is composed on Lord Shiva who is in the form of the element Appu or water at the temple!
The song is also one of the most sombre of Deekshitar kritis with an inherent feel of sadness of losing someone dear and introspecting the good times spent with that person.
Sri Maha ganapthi ravatu mam – gowla- composed on maha ganapathi of Tiruvarur temple.
The magnetic pull of the Ri(minor second) of the gowla is brilliantly put to use by Deekshitar as phrases go up and above only to be brought down to the Ri, like puppets on a string. And yet in the anupallavi Deekshitar climbs up to the upper echeleons in no time and then flies briskly into a majestic madhyamakaala and jatiswaras(swaras mixed with jatis or vocal rhythms). The charanam shines like gold and the take off for prakasha karo is prepare beautifully and meticulously. The ending madhyamakaala is a lesson for all those jazz-fusion aficionados to get hooked on as a winding conclusion pattern is drawn on top of a complex mishra ekam taala(cycle of 7 beats).
Ni saati deivamendu- sri ranjani – composed on Thyagarajaswamy of Thiruvarur temple
The only song that doesn't feature the mudra- guruguha and is entirely set in telugu. It is a dance-song intended for Bharatanatyam performance. But musically it is a gem. Deekshitar accuses, coos and kisses the Lord with different prayogas of the same note – Ni(dominant 7th). In this song Deekshitar sings in Naayika-bhava or the female-context. Watch out for the swara passage at the end for some very amusing phrasing.
Finally
Sri Muthuswami Deekshitar is the single-most important composer in the history of this great country and his songs represent what we as Indians stand for -secularism, inclusiveness,  intellect and imagination. The aim of the article wasn't to give an exhaustive trivia of Deekshitar's life and his compositions, but to enlighten people who are yet to jump into the ocean of carnatic music. This article is to embrace the newcomers and introduce them to the one composer who's going to enthrall and excite them as never before.
